---
title: Fluorescence Spectroscopy
description: Experimental information for CHEM322
published: true
date: 2022-02-03T17:20:48.267Z
tags: spectroscopy, fluorescence, chem322
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-02-03T17:09:55.946Z
---

# Fluorescence Spectroscopy and A Characterization of Quinine

## Theory
Fluorescence is an analytically important emission process in which atoms or
molecules are excited by the absorption of a photon.  After a very brief
lifetime (a few nanoseconds), the excited species then relax to ground state
giving up their excess energy as a photon of lower energy.  Fluorescence is one
of two possible relaxation pathways for most molecules[^1], the other being a
nonradiative heat loss.  The efficiency of a fluorescent molecule ($Q_f$) depends
on, in part, with the number of molecules that take each pathway.  A very
efficient fluorescer will have a fluorescence efficiency of 1, i.e. all emitted
energy is in the form of light emission.  A nonfluorescent molecule will have an
efficiency of 0, i.e., all emitted energy is released as heat.

[^1]: A third pathway is possible for special molecules involving a ‘forbidden’
  transition to a triplet excited state and subsequent even lower energy photon
  emission called phosphorescence.  As very few molecules are phosphors, this
  pathway will be ignored for simplicity.

The fact that very few molecules actually fluoresce makes this a very specific
technique of analysis for those compounds that do.  To determine if a molecule
is likely to fluoresce, one needs to look at its structure.  Saturated molecules
and molecules with only a single double bond do not exhibit fluorescence.
Molecules with at least one aromatic ring or multiple conjugated double bonds
are likely to fluoresce in the visible or near ultraviolet regions.  Molecular
rigidity is a must.  Phenaphthalein (Figure 1A) has 3 aromatic rings yet is
very loose and does not fluoresce ($Q_f = 0$), losing its energy via vibration and
subsequent heat loss.  Fluorescein (Figure 1B) is a very similar structure with
a bridging oxygen between two of the rings.  It fluoresces very very well ($Q_f =
0.98$).  In addition, substituents which are electron donating groups such as
-OH, -OCH<sub>3</sub>, and -NH<sub>2</sub> enhance fluorescence, likewise,
electron withdrawing groups such as carbonyls or -COOH inhibit fluorescence.

![**Figure 1:** Structures of phenolphthalein (nonfluorescent) and fluorescein
(fluorescent).  Note bridging oxygen makes fluorescein more rigid preserving
excited state energy for photon emission.](/chem322/figures/fluorescence1.png =50%x)


Temperature increases will cause more vibrational heat loss and subsequent loss
of fluorescence as does a decrease in solvent viscosity.  The presence of heavy
atoms either in the solution or on the molecule promote phosphorescence, again
at the cost of decreasing fluorescence. A fluorescent molecule with an acidic or
basic substituent will also be subject to a pH dependence on fluorescence.
Changes in the electronic character, especially on the number of possible
resonance forms, will change the deactivation pathway.  A species with a greater
number of resonance forms will be more likely to fluoresce.

The term quenching is used describe any reduction in fluorescence intensity.
Common types of quenching include *concentration quenching*, *collisional
quenching*, and *chemical quenching*.  In concentration quenching, the
fluorescence-per-unit-concentration (aka sensitivity) decreases as concentration
increases, as when A > 0.05 per the discussion above.  This is also referred to
as the *inner filter effect* because the solution absorbs incident radiation
such that it acts as a filter &mdash; no radiation reaches the emission zone.
Collisional quenching may be caused by nonradiative energy loss from the excited
molecules or the quenching agent (such as a heavy atom or even oxygen) may
facilitate conversion of the excited singlet state molecules to a triplet state.
Chemical quenching is due to actual changes in the chemical nature of the
fluorescent substance.  Aniline is an example: it fluoresces between pH 5 and 13
(where it has several resonance forms) but is non fluorescent as an anilinium
cation below pH 5 nor as an anion above pH 13.

The amount of fluoresce for a molecule can be easily related to concentration
using a calibration curve (of course if it didn't, then there would be no reason
for even looking at the technique!)  The intensity of fluorescent radiation
($I_f$) is proportional to the absorbance of the molecule, the lamp intensity
($I_o$), the fluorescence efficiency of the molecule ($Q_f$) and instrumental
parameters ($k$) as such:

$$ F = I_o ( 1 - 10^{εbc}) Q_f k $$

Expansion of this expression leads to a nasty power function.  Provided that
absorbance, A = εbc is very small ( < 0.05), most of the power function can be
ignored yielding:

$$ F = I_o ( 2.3 εbc) Q_f k $$

thus a plot of fluorescence vs. concentration will be linear at low
concentrations of the absorber and will become nonlinear when absorbance exceeds
0.05 (ca 90%T or c < 0.01 M but dependent on molar absorptivity and fluorescence
efficiency) and the remaining terms of the power series come into play.  Note
that the absorber concentration for fluorescence is lower than that of
UV-visible spectroscopy. Fluorescence is nonlinear at a value of absorbance that
is hardly on scale!

## Quinine
Quinine (Figure 2, C<sub>20</sub>H<sub>24</sub>N<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, 324.4
g/mol) will be used to demonstrate the quantitation and detection abilities of
fluorescence as well as the pH dependence and quenching effects on
fluorescence. Under usual conditions, quinine has two excitation peaks, a ground
state to first excited state at 350 nm and a ground state to second excited
state at 250 nm, and one emission peak at 450 nm.  Care must be taken so that
Rayleigh, Tyndall, and Raman scattering do not interfere.  Rayleigh scattering
refers to radiation scattered in all directions by elastic collisions (impinging
and dispersed radiation are of the same wavelength and are radiated in a random
manner).  This is often seen as a band where monochromator wavelengths are the
same and source radiation is deflected to the detector.  Raman scattering
involves inelastic collisions as electromagnetic energy is mixed with the
rotational and vibrational energy of the colliding molecule resulting in
radiation of a different wavelength.

![**Figure 2:** Structure of quinine.](/chem322/figures/fluorescence2.png =50%x)

## Instrumentation 
In order to separate emitted radiation from incident radiation, fluorescent
measurements are made at right angles to the incident beam.  This is possible
since incident radiation passes directly through the cell but fluorescence is
emitted in all directions. The typical fluorometer layout is shown in Figure 3.
Most of the components are the same as used for UV-visible spectroscopy.
Exceptions include the source lamps which will be higher intensity for
fluorescence since emission is dependent on source intensity.  The limit to
power of the source lamp will be the point where the molecules suffer thermal
breakdown.  The simplest instrument, a fluorometer, will have removable filters
for wavelength discrimination.  For scanning, a spectrofluorometer or
fluorescence spectrophotometer, will have motored grating monochromators for
wavelength control.  Most scanning instruments are double beam in design with a
reference photomultiplier to monitor source fluctuations.  Although
spectrofluorometers are more useful since they can obtain spectra, a fluorometer
will have higher throughput and thus better sensitivity (also the source,
sample, and detector are closer together enhancing sensitivity).

![**Figure 3:** Block diagram of a typical fluorometer or
spectrofluorometer.](/chem322/figures/fluorescence3.png =50%x)

## Experimental

### Apparatus

 - a spectrofluorometer (PE LS 55)
 - quartz cuvettes volumetric flasks (1  1000 mL, 6  100 mL, 12  25 mL)
 - pipets ( 6  10 mL, 12  2 mL)

### Chemicals

 - quinine stock solution (100.0 μg/mL) 
 
  > This must be prepared fresh every day and protected from light: obtain
  > 120.7 mg quinine sulfate dihydrate or 100.0 mg quinine, transfer to a 1 L
  > volumetric flask, add 50 mL of 1 M sulfuric acid and dilute to the mark
  > with water
  {.is-info}
    
 - quinine stock solution (10.0 μg/mL) prepared from above
 - unknown quinine solution made in 0.05 M H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> and stored in refrigerator
 - tonic water sample
 - 0.05 M H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> for dilutions
 - solid NaBr or a 0.05 M NaBr solution
 - buffers (higher capacity than pH buffers) pH 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6

### Procedures

#### Calibration Curve 

Prepare a series of quinine standards from the 100 μg/mL stock standard using
0.05 M sulfuric acid as the diluent.  One source recommends a series of
sequential tenfold dilutions until the most dilute sample gives a fluorescence
intensity approximately equal to that of the blank (use the diluent as the
blank).  It is also a **good idea** to place standards between each sequential
dilution so as to completely monitor curve shape.  Ask previous project managers
how they handled the curve!

Read the instructions for operation of the fluorometer.  Record the excitation
and emission spectra for quinine using a 2 μg/mL quinine solution.  This, btw,
is not a one step deal!

Next measure the fluorescence of each standard and the
blank at the maximum excitation and emission frequencies for quinine using water
to blank the instrument if needed/possible.  Scanning is not helpful here!  Also
determine the fluorescence of the unknown quinine solution making proper
dilutions in necessary to hit the linear region of the calibration curve.

Also measure the fluorescence of a sample of quinine tonic water after the
following dilutions: pipet 5.00 mL of tonic water into a 250-mL volumetric
flask, dilute to the mark with the sulfuric acid diluent ( 0.05 M
H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub>); pipet 5.00 mL of this solution into a 25-mL
volumetric and again dilute to the mark with the sulfuric acid diluent[^2].
Measure the fluorescence of this latter solution.

[^2]:  It is also possible to determine the quinine level in urine using a
  technique in J. E. O’Reilly, *J. Chem. Ed.*, 1975, **52**, 610.

##### Treatment of Data

Plot the relative intensity vs. Quinine concentration on log-log axes.  If the
sulfuric acid solution reading is not zero, its value should be subtracted form
fluorescent readings before plotting. Discuss any deviation from nonlinearity in
the plots and explain where the deviations arose.  Determine the concentration
of the unknown quinine sample and of the tonic water from the curve. Calculate
the concentrations of quinine in undiluted unknown and tonic water.

Assume the limit of detection is the concentration of material that yields a
fluorescence that is 10% more than the emission observed for the blank, and
calculate its value for quinine. For example, if the water blank has a 20%
reading, then the concentration of quinine that would give a reading of 22%
would be the limit of detection. Also look at your data and see if you can
extract limits of linearity for quinine using this fluorometer.

#### pH Dependence of Quinine Sulfate
Pipet 2.0 mL of the 10.0 ìg/mL standard quinine solution into a 25-mL volumetric
flask and dilute to the mark with a pH 1 buffer solution.  Measure the exact pH
of the resulting solution with a pH meter.  Repeat the procedure with the other
five buffer solutions between pH 2 and 6.  The concentration of quinine sulfate
will be the same in all flasks.  Measure the relative fluorescence intensity of
all these solutions.

##### Treatment of Data
Plot fluorescence intensity vs. pH for the six solutions.  On the basis of these
results, what conclusions can be drawn about the pH dependence of quinine
sulfate?  Suggest possible different structures for quinine involved.  This is
not occurring in a vacuum! We studied pKa's last term. You are looking at others
trends here!

#### Halide Quenching of Quinine Fluorescence
Pipet 2.0 mL of the 10.0 μg/mL standard quinine solution into a 25-mL volumetric
flask, add 1.0 mL of 0.05 M NaBr, and dilute to the mark with sulfuric acid
diluent. Prepare four more solutions with 2.0 mL of the 10.0 μg/mL standard
quinine solution in each and add 2.0-, 4.0-, 8.0-, and 16.0-mL portions of NaBr
successively.  Measure the relative fluorescence of these five solutions.

##### Treatment of Data
Plot fluorescence intensity vs. bromide ion concentration and explain the
results. Read your text! Could a very dilute HCl solution be used instead of
0.05 M H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub>?  Why?

### Questions
 
 1. Explain why the radiation from fluorescence is measured 90° from the excitation radiation.
 2. Discuss the deactivation processes which compete with fluorescence.
 3. Describe methodology (process) of how fluorescence excitation spectra are measured.  Why are these steps needed?
 4. Which look similar to an absorption spectrum &mdash; a fluorescence excitation or fluorescence emission spectrum?  How is the latter involved in the former?  Why are there differences between these three spectra? Explain.
